In this first installment of the series on Artificial Intelligence in Cancer Clinical Research, it is crucial to define the concept of intelligence and the key features we associate with human intelligence. Intelligence is primarily linked with human beings and encompasses perception, cognition, thought, conceptualization, pattern recognition, symbolic processing, creativity, and problem-solving. Although we recognize elements of intelligence in other species, we generally view intelligence as a manifestation of our conscious awareness, capacity to form concepts, symbolic processing, language development, and our ability to reason, make decisions, and use judgment as we navigate our world (Citation1–4). Meanwhile, consciousness and self-awareness, fundamental and unique to the human experience, remain profound and elusive mysteries. How can the complex arrangement of atoms and molecules, which follow the physical laws of motion, alongside the intricate network of neurons in the central nervous system, give rise to our conscious experience and ability to think and reason, as well as to feel joy, sadness, love, and beauty? While machine learning (ML) may accommodate conceptual processes, human intellect is capable of generating new, abstract concepts that further organize their environment and, importantly, discover abstract ideas. These processes offer new insights beyond the tangible world, creating personal worlds of meaningful symbolic systems driven by curiosity for meaning and understanding of the surrounding world (Citation2). While a sign represents a characteristic of the external world suitable for algorithmic analysis, a symbol evokes an abstract internal response distinct from any specific event (Citation2). Human symbolic systems facilitate the communication of cognitive information through language as well as emotional information. Many of humanity’s most significant qualities stem from the development and creative use of symbolic systems, leading to the formation of culture, myth, idealism, and empathy. A sign is seen as a context-free characteristic of an object or situation, whereas a symbol refers to internal experiences. These experiences gain meaning within the context of emotions and interests, shaped by prior experiences and memory, and the current situation, generating feelings or emotions as we actively contribute to the creation of our world (Citation1).