In this first of the series on Artificial Intelligence in Cancer Clinical Research, it was important to attempt to define the concept of intelligence and the important features we associated with human intelligence. Intelligence was a construct that we associated most notably with human beings and our understanding of human intelligence including perception, cognition, thought, conceptualization, pattern recognition, symbolic processing, creativity, and problem solving. While we acknowledged apparent elements of intelligence in other living species, we most commonly thought of intelligence as a manifestation of our conscious awareness and ability to form concepts along with our capacity for symbolic processing, the development of language and ultimately our ability to reason, make decisions and use judgement as we navigated our world (Citation1–4). At the same time, while consciousness and self-awareness seemed fundamental and unique to the human experience, these concepts remained profound and elusive mysteries. How could the complex array of atoms and molecules that ultimately behaved according to the physical laws of motion, along with the intricate network of neurons in the central nervous system, give rise to our internal conscious experience and ability to think and reason along with experiences such as joy, sadness, love, and beauty? While conceptual processes might have been amenable to machine learning (ML), the human intellect was capable of generating new, abstract concepts that further organized his or her environment and, importantly, discovered abstract ideas. Such processes provided new insights beyond the actual world and, in a sense, created his or her own world of meaningful symbolic systems with an active curiosity striving for meaning and true understanding of the world around us (Citation2). While a sign represented a characteristic of the external world amenable to algorithmic analysis and mimicking, a symbol evoked an abstract internal response separate from a particular concrete event (Citation2). Human symbolic systems were not only used for communication of cognitive information enabling language but also for the communication of emotional information. In fact, many of humanity’s most important and highest qualities related to the development and creative use of symbolic systems resulting in the development of culture, myth, idealism, and empathy. While a sign could be thought of as a context-free characteristic of an object or situation, a symbol referred to experiences within ourselves. These experiences gained meaning within a context of emotions and interests resulting from the intersection of our prior experience and memory and the present situation to generate feelings or emotions within ourselves as we participated as active contributors to the creation of our world (Citation1).

